Good day. We have a guest today, e.e.
Natalya Kutsul, Doctor of Technical Sciences,
Professor, Head of the Department of
Mathematical Modeling and Data Analysis of
Sikorsky Kyiv Polytechnic Institute.
some places at the Olympiads
with people who are engaged in science or
Olympiads in order to popularize
this
field, let's say, because we usually have
everyone there talking about dancers and
athletes, someone jumped, everyone knows about him,
and science happens somehow in the
background, although everything We keep
there  let's hold the phone, this is the work of
chemists, physicists, programmers, and so on.
Briefly tell us what
your department does, in simple
words for the viewer.
data of various types and mainly
satellite data because satellite
monitoring is my field of scientific
activity, my field of interest,
we train students in
applied mathematics, and we try to get a
very good background in
mathematics, physics, and computer science,
because these three areas  They are the
basis of modern technologies related
to the processing of satellite data and various
other data. You also need to deeply
understand the physics of the specifics of obtaining these
data. You need to understand the mathematical
methods for processing them for modeling
processes.
applied mathematics is exactly
the specialty that is needed to become a
specialist in satellite intelligence. And
if I am not mistaken, it seems that it
has been a year or so since there were fires somewhere in the
world, it seems that you had a post about
computer analysis of satellite data from these
fires.
that I don't understand this at all,
I think many viewers also
for them space there is some analysis
of satellites yes Only with the war we are
watching Yeah there Russian Tanks
broke as far as what the
satellite can see Yes and what we can
analyze from this satellite
now there are a lot of satellites on  there are
approximately 5,000
active satellites in the earth's orbit this year. These are the ones that
shoot something and transmit it to the earth. They are very
different. There are satellites that study the
constellations and other planets.
take place in the atmosphere and the physics of those
processes, that is, with the help of satellites,
we can understand how life
on Earth is arranged. Well, there is a whole direction
called earth observation, these are
satellites that directly look at
us at what humanity is doing, and they
are also very different from
military satellites that  they shoot
very detailed information that there,
conditionally speaking, you can have stars on the epaulettes,
look at the satellites. Well, they are paid, they are
closed, they are used by
state intelligence, and thank God our state has
access to such data, but we are engaged in
the processing of open satellite data,
those that are publicly available, and this is data
that  have a resolution of 10 meters per
pixel, that is, one point that we see
on the ground is 10 by 10 meters, but such
data are received regularly every 5-6 days,
every point of the earth's territory is covered with
such data and this has already been happening since the
15th year from the 14th  To be precise, and
therefore it is possible to study many
terrestrial processes that can be observed with the
help of these satellites, and here,
since there is a lot of this data, then
the problem of processing large data of big data arises, and
machine learning methods are needed, because
you cannot manually analyze
such a volume of data.
just now, by the way, it’s a quite
popular direction. I’m looking at it, there
are also training machines. And how are
you doing with the selection of personnel, because in order
to go conditionally to some kind of law school, you
have to have diplomas to pass some stories,
and here you need a person not  I
just passed and understood physics and
physics and mathematics are directed, i.e.
is there a shortage of such children or is there
interest, how is this because
we can develop any programs
but there are none If there are not those who will
go to them Yes,
you know
before that  of course, this year is not
indicative. Until this year, we always had a
selection and there were enough students. This
year, we recruited for the budget for the first year
less than it was possible to recruit because of the war because of the
war.
have drawn conclusions and will
improve our educational program. We
will work better with schoolchildren so that
they know more about us and want to
come to us. I think yes. What is the problem here? The problem is that there are
a lot of children.
wanted to go to
Kyiv to enter the Shevchenko KPI because of
this military service, it is not clear whether there are
some people there who are worried that later students
will be mobilized, he will not study, they
chose Western universities, and
this year it was massive, that is why I think
that this year he cannot be an exception
so put it on your own fault. You see,
we did something wrong there. Well,
nevertheless, you always have to draw
conclusions to learn from every life
situation, but this year we recruited
more students than we expected for
master's degrees and much more than we
expected for postgraduate students,
that is, this direction of ours among  maybe
10th graders, they still don't fully
understand what they are and what they can
get in this or that field, they
go into more popular areas such
as computer science or
software engineering, but students
who have already finished their bachelor's degree and think
who they will really be in life  and they don't
want to be just backhand and front-end
developers, but want to do something
really cool, so they come, and this
year we had a competition.
now people came not only those who
graduated from our faculty but also came from
other universities of Ukraine and a
specialist came who already holds a good top
position in the Samsung company and he
realized that he still needs an education,
he still needs to get a phd and defend himself
here, see what
we have  the concept of an aitishnik for a person is not an
initiation, this is everyone who is somewhere in this, it is
all aitishniks Yes, but in order to become an
aitishnik and make websites, you can
go two weeks if you conditionally teach a person this way
and he will live this site if you really
make some systems are very cool here
we need to say this because we
still
don't have a lot of popularization of this so why do
they go there for that specialty because
one of their acquaintances went there older and so
they go there and so You can say like this For example that with the
help of these
satellites of satellites we can
of course on  analyze either from your
examples or from the examples of colleagues,
for example, if we take examples,
we and the Scientific Group that analyzes damage
from war, damage to
agriculture, damage to ecology,
for example, on the basis of satellite data,
we determined that in the combat zone
where Luhansk Region there is such a
reserve which  are protected by UNESCO, it
is called the emerald network, that is, there are
forests of very rare species that the
whole world knows about, and this zone is under
protection, so that is the territory that
is on the controlled
Ukrainian territory, it has been preserved
there, there were some fellings, but the forest is
being restored and it is clear that this process is
normal, but here is the forest  which is in an
uncontrolled, occupied territory,
it is completely destroyed, and the same is
true throughout the demarcation zone, not only
that in that climatic zone it is steppes, there are
so few forests, and they are absolutely
necessary, even for
agriculture, forest strips are needed, but all
this is destroyed because of the war and  this can be
observed, for example, it is also a very
practical thing that is in demand now,
international agencies provide
Ukrainian farmers with assistance to those farmers who
suffered from the war, but it is necessary to
understand whether this farmer was really injured,
whether his field was in the war zone, whether
he sowed it or what kind of damage he
has from this And
thanks to our technologies, it is the
recognition of what is growing, the
recognition of the quality, the recognition of
whether this field was damaged by bombs, it
allows you to really assess the real, real
damage that has been received, understand that it is not
just a person sitting and watching,
some computer program makes
its prediction that  let's say this field
is damaged, for example, so many percent of
the yield. Yes, the beds there
are conditional, yes,
this is machine learning, that is, first we
train the neural network to recognize what
exactly grows on this territory, and
we have been solving such problems for more than 5 years,
we know what happened in all  fields in
Ukraine and in the occupied territory,
in particular, and
analyzing the state of the vegetation, understanding
what it should be, also using models and
mathematical models of plant growth,
we see whether this corn is developing
well or badly. For example, it can be seen that
many fields this year did not grow
well, that is, they
are developing much worse, because well, you can see  economically it
was either impossible or unprofitable or it
was not clear what to do, that is, this
year our agriculture lost a lot.
the situation, taking into account the
infrastructure, is available
and these are such modern things that
allow us to bring intelligent
models into our modern life.
what is its essence and how do you
perform, for example, your Students there
or Schoolchildren who practice in our
circles,
now in general the
concept of open science and open
data is developing in the world, and in this connection, large companies
create such servers on which there is a lot of
data, a lot of data and  sites and interested
people can develop their models and
practice with these datasets
because artificial intelligence is the science of
data, science that works on data is not just
some formula that you have to
program, but it is a
system that should find patterns
in the available data and give some  forecasts
or classification,
recommendations of some kind of management system. And there
is such a Google server, it is such a
large global system that contains
a lot of data and sets, and the leading
companies, commercial companies of the world,
create competitions there, that is, they give a
task, give their day and set and expect
that teams or individuals  participants will
solve this problem, whoever
solves it better will receive a cash prize, these
can be big prizes, for example,
100,000 euros each, 10,000 euros of
participants there. Tens of
thousands of
participants participate.  in the field of machine learning and
data analysis, and it is obvious that if you
show that you are winning in these
competitions, this system is similar to Kotfors,
for example, or to Eolympus, our
Olympic programming competition system.
her task, plus she can
recruit specialists who already know how to
solve this problem. Well, young people are an
opportunity to demonstrate themselves,
earn a portfolio, so that later you will be well
hired and add and you show,
look, here I am, I hired such and such, and
this is confirmation  that you can
work with those data and others. So,
yes,
absolutely,
I recently saw that you have
a circle at the department, and schoolchildren, too.
and where will they move next,
this is a very good question. It
concerns how large
innovative companies develop science.
NASA, the National Agency for the Atmosphere
and Space, the German
Space Agency,
holds a hackathon every year. It gives
interesting tasks related to processing or
working with satellite data and these
tasks These are the ones that I have not solved at the moment,
which are at the forefront of the science of
space data processing in
countries around the world. Usually, more than
100 countries hold such akathon at the same time
on the weekend. It usually
takes place for two days, and in Ukraine it is also
held every year in
different  cities in Kyiv, it is regularly
held in the Dnipro sometimes in Odesa
and
teams gather to
solve the
tasks of
effective processing or analysis of
satellite data this year set by the American National Space Agency. Among
such tasks was the task of analyzing the impact of
climate on the lives of
all people  etc. The team of our department, a team of
students who study with us and
attend the circle of applied
mathematics took part in this hackathon
and researched using satellite data
how the list of
agricultural crops
growing in the fields changes with climate change.  there
were no sunflowers
And now the picture in the fields
is completely changing, those crops that were
not grown before are growing, the
climatic conditions are changing Well, this is
interesting from the ecological point of view, from the point of
view of sustainable development, the task
about the circle, this circle of ours, formally,
officially, it was opened only
last month, but  not formally. We have
been working with children for many years, and
starting with the Institute of Space
Research, where I worked for a long time, we
tried to attract children and
stimulate their interest in space
activities and science in general, so that they do not
just go to program the front end,
so that they go to consciously solve  some
interesting and important tasks, and this year
we opened a circle that has been
working de facto for several years, the leader of this
circle is our young employee Anya
Yelymova.
both our students
and schoolchildren take part, they are interested, and for them
we hold summer schools, we hold some
internal competitions, we take part
in such international events, because it
greatly stimulates children, if he sees that
on the NASA website it is clear that there were 300
teams and  here is our project among them and we
won a regional competition and they gave us
$10,000 worth of resources on the
Amazon web services platform, he is already
asking not just for money, yes, but for
resources.  you
can opportunities, it also develops your
opportunities
as children, for example, to get into this circle,
it is purely at KPI, so if there is a
child, for example, in Kyiv, how
can he join this circle, and is there
any, for example, a child who is not from Kyiv, so
what are the options  to join the space Yes, you
know now in connection with
covid, which brought a lot of damage, but it
also gave us new opportunities, we are all used to
working remotely, that's why our circle
It works in a mixed format, some
meetings are held in person at the beginning of
the year, we all met together to at least
see  what do the participants look like, they
continue to cooperate online, and
this hackathon itself also took place online, so
anyone can join. And in general,
at this hackathon, there were teams not
only from one city, but there were national
teams, some from Kharkiv, some from Kyiv,
some at this time in  is located in Poland and
they are members of the same team, so there are
absolutely no boundaries and
interested children can
join in how to join Well, first of all,
I already think that because there is no
manager there, and ours,
I am not so sure, but I think that there is an
e-mail  this circle definitely has a
group in Telegram where they communicate and
lead,
discuss everything there, move forward,
discuss all their tasks, and
even because of the fact
that our department is able to write
that I am interested and we will accept to us,
just then I gave a description under the video and the conclusion
When I will  mount Yes, I will display these
contacts, yes, that is, so that it is possible for
her children, for example, how interesting it is because
we have these nuggets, a lot, a lot
of them.  he will write and
three of them will come, I will become a
scientist or do some cool things.
I think it will be cool.
Even this one. Let's leave the contacts. That is, it is
possible to join like this. It is absolutely normal for children to write and there, yes, in Ukraine, we can join.
we try to give it to the children not very
systematically, but we try to give
information about some existing competitions,
to submit an idea, maybe give some
background. Because in fact, sometimes it is enough
to learn something quite a bit so that you
can already offer your ideas, it
pushes you to some innovative
projects and you can win,
participate and  to win in contests and in
international contests and in manos,
including, for example, a water cake, entry
if there is conditionally capable there with
9-10-11 class yes How much time does he need
to at least just
start working there with those datasets
on the map, for example.
Well, you need a little longer to Kaglu. Although there
are such training courses for beginners there for work,
and there you need to know
English, but I listened to your
interview with Bohdan Rublev, and he
said that it is very important to know
English, it is important to know mathematics.
And I think he also called it
programming Well, I will add physics to these three
because if physics is added to these three sciences, the
English mathematics of programming,
then you don't just
become a door opens for you in
computer science, but a door opens for you
in  very
complex areas in very modern areas
where the competition is not so high and there is an
opportunity to get to the very top. For
example, a graduate of the
Institute of Physics and Technology,
our Leonid Shumila, two years ago, he
graduated and entered graduate school at the
University of Maryland. And this
university is
one of the third in the world  for the repair of
sensing, it is science related to the processing of
satellite data, and in a different way, the ratings are
the first. That is, this is a top university. This is
your road to Olympus, you can say
to the scientific Olympus of space
achievements, and this university
works directly with us, directly gives grants to
graduate students, so there is an opportunity
to break through is such a social elevator, you can
say your knowledge of mathematics, physics,
computer science in English, they
open doors for you to very
cool institutions, this is only about space,
and the day before yesterday we had a meeting with
representatives of a commercial company that
is engaged in the
analysis and development of
new pharmaceutical substances  substances,
economic analysis of the impact of various viruses, to
make viral agents, they also need
mathematics, they need physics, because we need to
model the physical processes of the spread of an
epidemic, and this is actually all the
same, the same mathematical
background is needed in order to
develop science in absolutely different
areas
in our country  you know, I will say this, I see that in the
last decades the
popularity of mathematics education, physics,
it is technically And in general, it fell very much, there
was a period when everyone ran to become lawyers, now many
lawyers are not running, now all
are running programmers, well, they run
there without the desire to teach the same mathematics there
yes, I'm clicking. I'm already going to clip
sites. I'm already a programmer. I
don't need anything else. I'm paid in
dollars. Yes, we have a lot of people who have rushed into
it because of the fact that it is possible to
work remotely, get to live here
and receive a salary in dollars on this
this type of machine is not even fully competent
people, they already
feel comfortable enough with the level of salaries And this is
enough to not
move further in life anywhere if this but
in fact if we show that there are things
on uh really there are qualified
a person can have much cooler
results for himself and much more
interesting because It’s one thing when you
sit
and just do all your life as if This format, well, that is,
it does not require such a
serious qualification And the
world market is still growing.
It seems to me like it  the competition is
because there are also a lot of Indians and Brazilians,
and they can do it as
IT workers anyway, after 10 years there will be
about enough, but there are few cool people
who can be hired for some modern tasks.
where do they
find work in this specialty
abroad or in Ukraine, there are also opportunities
where they are found, we guide our
graduates that they can go either to
science, to good science and This science is both
abroad and in Ukraine, but I want to
emphasize that I have worked all my life
in  science in Ukraine, but what we did
was always connected with
international partners, it was always
participation in international scientific projects, and
thanks to this, we preserved both the scientific
competitiveness in Ukraine and
the financial one, because, unfortunately, in Ukraine,
science is placed in such conditions that  it
despises itself, and in order for it to
be a truly competitive science,
it needs to be within the limits of
international international cooperation, then
you feel yourself and with knowledge at the level,
you see what your level is and according to Fin. According to the
salary, it is quite possible for this to happen, you
need to understand what is needed  it is necessary to seek
a partnership, it is necessary to
popularize your achievements so that
these international partners know about you, you
need to write scientific articles, not only
scientific articles,
secondly, where do our children go?
somewhere around 2-3 people. That is, it is a pyramid
such that very few graduate students get to science.
Is this too much or too little, according to your
assessment? Well, I and the audience do not understand.
Two or three people in graduate school is
cool or is it not enough for Ukraine
in this specialty  so far this is
normal Considering the fact that our department has
only been in existence for the second year last year
We had two graduate students join us this
year three graduate students Well, we will increase it, there
will not be dozens. That is, it is an artificial
product.
he has his own topic of research, this is non-mass
education, and this is education, work with each
specific graduate student who has his own
field of research and will have his own
achievements, this is a person who will already be
oriented to
winning in life, to some victories.
everyone
stays in science there, too. And it happens in the world
in the same way that
after graduating from graduate school, some people go to develop
science and become professors, while the other
part go to an innovative company and
stand as
top managers, create their own startups,
innovative startups that do not just
sell pies or do something there
some kind of mass production
startup, she has now moved on. I am opening
a kiosk
here. Yes, and ours are opening innovative
startups, startups that are based on
all this knowledge and give the opportunity to
actually implement artificial intelligence in
our life, but now
a lot of such intelligent startups
are developing, and our graduates are also
becoming such  Starts in the post that some
of your graduates are also
startups. And what is the topic of his startup,
if you can know, yes, it is the definition of
automatic detection of productions in forests, and
this startup is also related
to them. They cooperate with our
National Security and Defense Council of
Ukraine, and they are still analyzing whether  there
is an official permit for this felling, i.e.
is this felling legal or
illegal? Well, for starters, it turns out that it is
non-commercial, that is, it turns out that he does
not, well, who is his client
?  it turns out that the governments of the
communities, which also very often
turn out to be a
miracle for me, now we have a decentralization of the
community, they get their own order of a
certain area of ​​the territory, they do not really
know what is there,
and that is why the
patriarchs even this intelligent planning of
the development of the communities
is necessary. And
here I am just like  a person is also a business Yes, not
only this science is more business than
science, you can say that. I immediately evaluate
each startup who will give it money and
how the startup will sell itself, that is, that is why it is possible to
convince the heads of
communities that they should use
this information. Yes, we also have a hard time
if Well, to begin with, in each country, the
state, or state administration,
is served by a lot of commercial
companies that provide objective
information, where the state will take this
information, and the employees of the Ministry. They will not analyze those fellings.
just this
month they launched the state register of
farmers, where farmers register their fields,
show what they grow there and can
count on state support in
Europe, these are subsidies for growing
crops that
we need, affected farmers can
apply for state support for
insurance and development of their  business
people
register in this register and through
it they can receive certain
compensations or payments, so one of the
important sources in this register is
satellite information.  it is
better to sell
because of that and in Europe all over the world the state
controls all this and it is controlled with the
help of satellites, the
inspector drives around the fields and looks through the
binoculars, it is interesting. Yes, there is less
probability of the human factor of corruption here,
because, let's say, the inspector physically
cannot go around, and secondly  you can meet with the inspector
there, negotiate there, intimidate,
bribe, but here the data is open, you
can’t hide it, and let’s say yes, it’s interesting. That is,
everything is moving towards such automation.
and it is
possible that they will be interested in the topic of
data analysis from space satellites
that I would like, first of all, of course, I would like to
believe in myself and develop, to
want a lot because if you set
high goals for yourself, you
will achieve them. If you do not set them, then it is
obvious that you do not  you will never achieve a
second time, it is important to understand that this is a lot of
work, that is, here in
this field come people who invested
in studying mathematics and physics at school.
but, on the other hand, the dividends
that come later are much
more than the possibilities. This is really a
social elevator that allows you
to earn with your own mind and your own
brains, regardless of how
much and whether you came from a well-off family,
from which geographical region you
came, very often students who
join us are  From the regions of Kyiv,
they make their way and get better
results than those who were at the beginning in
better starting conditions, so in fact
it is very interesting and very powerful, that is,
in life it gives the opportunity to always find a
job and not only a job, but to find an
opportunity for self-realization
if I think so who  I will look at it, I will
leave it in the description under the video and maybe in the
contact, yes, how can you
contact the department if there are people, because it very
often happens that we did not even imagine the
existence of a certain area, so And when we get
to know it, we can be so
fascinated  and get dusty, I know a
lot of examples. Yes, when people
could simply be directed, and then they achieved
huge, huge successes.  I'm
telling you, we know
the athletes who scored a goal, so who
jumped 2 cm higher there than he
jumped last time, yes, that's all
we have, dances,
songs, sports - it's very good, it's part of
our life, but
because of science, intelligence, it's somewhere  there are
a lot of people in the shadows They see
They want to become a football player why
Because from every screen they see a
football player he is successful they don't see a
successful scientist there they don't see a
successful programmer there and so on so
thank you very much we will motivate
this path we will make a series of
popularization videos  science of education because we
actually have very, very many things and it's
pretty cool that you don't close
scientific institutions to yourself And post there on
Facebook, for example, I saw on Facebook
that there are really cool things like
hackathons like data analysis if you did
n't do it We wouldn't know  yes,
thank you very much for that, we are holding on, I think that
Ukraine will win, and you will continue to
focus not on the analysis of the military,
these influences, but on the development, yes,
absolutely, thank you very much, thank you. Goodbye.
All the best.